Add Stewardship notes (#63)
datatogether/reading_datatogether: notes/semester_02_2019/4-stewardship-2019-08-06.md

* How do we reconcile the frequent change of digital infrastructure with need of institutions and long-term continuity for effective stewardship?

> Digital infrastructure changes frequently...Digital infrastructure not only requires frequent maintenance and upkeep to be compatible with other software components, but its usage and adoption changes frequently as well. - (40) Eghbal

### 4) Curation. We can't preserve everything, so what do we choose to steward and preserve? What should be forgotten? How do we identify areas in need of repair and maintenance?

> Hoarding is not preservation. - (7) Owens

> Accept and embrace the archival sliver. We've never saved everything. We've never saved most  things. - (9) Owens
 
> ...one of the biggest challenges to its sustainability, is that there is no organizing body to determine what gets built or used in digital infrastructure. - (42) Eghbal

> * I have hesitency about things like Secure Scuttlebutt (SSB), that have no way to edit posts. I want my art to be what remains, not my growing pains. I don't want my shame and mistakes to be entertainment or reason for capital punishment (cancel culture).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* I have hesitancy about things like Secure Scuttlebutt (SSB), that have no way to edit posts. I want my art to be what remains, not my growing pains. I don't want my shame and mistakes to be entertainment or reason for capital punishment (cancel culture).
```

* How does maintenance and repair figure into the conversation as we focus on technological innovation and new tools?

### 5) Stewarding the Stewards. Preservation is a neverending process and so requires continuous care of not just what is preserved, but the people, practices, and culture doing the preserving. What problems can we identify with how we care for the stewards? How do we approach and resolve those problems?

> Instead of finding pathways for people to make their way into well-paid careers in libraries, archives, and museums, our society has established pathways from communities to prisons that provide cheap labor and further undermines the future of a professional cultural heritage workforce. - (127) Owens
    

> > cost-cutting practices leads to increased dependence on lower-cost labor, including volunteers, interns, and outsourced workers..."This puts the long-term survival of archives at risk, which challenges the archival paradigm of long-term preservation and historical importance" - (10) Abrams, et. al

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Cost-cutting practices leads to increased dependence on lower-cost labor, including volunteers, interns, and outsourced workers..."This puts the long-term survival of archives at risk, which challenges the archival paradigm of long-term preservation and historical importance" - (10) Abrams, et al.
```

Reviewer: (style explanation: https://brians.wsu.edu/2016/05/25/et-al/)

> > Positions are temporary...lead to frequent staff turnover; these conditions also lead archival workers to focus on short-term goals and objectives that can be completed within the terms of their contracts. As a result, we operate without the deep knowledge that comes with long-term practice, and without the institutional memory that would enable us to sustain the many relationships on which post-custodial projects depend. - (11) Abrams, et. al

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Positions are temporary...lead to frequent staff turnover; these conditions also lead archival workers to focus on short-term goals and objectives that can be completed within the terms of their contracts. As a result, we operate without the deep knowledge that comes with long-term practice, and without the institutional memory that would enable us to sustain the many relationships on which post-custodial projects depend. - (11) Abrams, et al.
```

    - Was introduced to stewardship through library science. People who had serious views on metadata, taxonomies, filing systems. To me, steward is someone...it's a profession, a professional steward
    - If it's not apparent, I really want this to fall apart fast. But want to be honest, conceive steward as someone who has intimate knowledge of library science, can steward this, notion of availability. Can keep accessible and available for a long time. That relationship is tightly coupled. Stewarding is a very serious committment. Real responsible to be a steward of an artifact
- KN: For the readings that didn't have anything to do with library science or data, how did you respond?
- B5: Have to admit, been running a company and did not do the readings. Though I love you to bits! <3
- RB: For you B5, 2 readings are applicable to your work. LTER article and Post-custodial archives paper
- B5: Have read stuff in past
- KN: No worries, glad you're here
- Mauve: Only glanced over notes myself, only had a week, also didn't have time. Next time will have more preparation
- KN: No worries, question still stands

> - Mauve: Stewardship is pretty new concept. Don't have any cultural knowledge of stewardship or personal experiences. One interesting use is by Fleki(?) from Dat, putting together network like communes where nomads come and do something with a given focus and then go somewhere else. A stream of nomads coming and going. But there are people living there,  stewards of the land that keep it maintained. Nomads help less. Stewards are taking care of it so others can use it and helping coordinate people. That concept as a role is interesting and cool

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Mauve: Stewardship is pretty new concept. Don't have any cultural knowledge of stewardship or personal experiences. One interesting use is by Fleeky(?) from Dat community, putting together network like communes where nomads come and do something with a given focus and then go somewhere else. A stream of nomads coming and going. But there are people living there,  stewards of the land that keep it maintained. Nomads help less. Stewards are taking care of it so others can use it and helping coordinate people. That concept as a role is interesting and cool
```

- KB: Is that a novel or real?
- Mauve: It's real. A community they're building. Bought land and making like a "circus" commune. Making it a network for these hubs
- KB: Cool, is there a link?
- Mauve: Will ask. Not sure if it's public yet. Will ask and post in Slack
- KB: Thanks
- KN: Kelsey, anything to add?
- KB: Heard of stewardship term in 2 contexts

>     - Montessori: stewarding a space. Elementary classrooms where everybody has a chore everyday, time at the end of the day for dusting computer monitors or rolling things up, put away. Space stewardship which is cool interaction and ownership over space. No cleaners are coming. This is your space and need to take care of it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Montessori: stewarding a space. Elementary classrooms where everybody has a chore every day, time at the end of the day for dusting computer monitors or rolling things up, put away. Space stewardship which is cool interaction and ownership over space. No cleaners are coming. This is your space and need to take care of it.
```

>     - Land stewardship: My dad spent career in timber sales. Dual part - they are clear cutting Alaskan forests but also works for tribal entities. Job a decade ago was stewardship of island with monoculture of spruce. Spruce takes a 100 years to mature. A lot of trees you can harvest in 10 years. But not spruce. Had to create plans accounting for livelihood but also economic, spirtual, recreational pursuits of tribal owners or shareholders. How Alaska native claims settled out, in perpetuity. Had to create plans out 100 years

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Land stewardship: My dad spent career in timber sales. Dual part - they are clear cutting Alaskan forests but also works for tribal entities. Job a decade ago was stewardship of island with monoculture of spruce. Spruce takes 100 years to mature. A lot of trees you can harvest in 10 years. But not spruce. Had to create plans accounting for livelihood but also economic, spiritual, recreational pursuits of tribal members/shareholders. How Alaska Native claims settled out, in perpetuity. Had to create plans out 100 years
```

    - On dad's side, lots of passing things down and understanding family history when it's special. Not like that on mom's side, contrasts
    - Thinking of things my parents have that I grew up with, or have been given me. Especially last year, grandma passed, my dad and his siblings splitting that stuff. **What needs continued custodianship? Who can provide that?** Interesting perspective on it. 
    - Sense of even though the person it was meaningful for is not around, not stewarding for society, but still sense of importance. This table is important, or this chest, or whatever. Think about that a lot. Intergenerational
- KN: I liked that people touched on ownership. Talked to neighbor who is a pastor. They had a great term, it's the "antidote to dominion", instead of lording over or controlling something. Instead, taking care of, the proper care and use of things. Theme I wanted to touch on next
    - Within the Tending the Wild reading
    - > ...one gains respect for nature by *using* it judiciously. By using a plant or an animal, interacting with it, where it lives, and tying your well-being to its existence, you can be intimate with it and understand it. (xvi) - Anderson

>     - that's how you take care of it. Similaring the LTER paper they talked about how scientists in the field taking notes on paper, changing things in the margins, it's more visceral and by doing so they have a better sense of the data as opposed to just numbers in a spreadsheet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - that's how you take care of it. Similar, in the LTER paper they talked about how scientists in the field taking notes on paper, changing things in the margins, it's more visceral and by doing so they have a better sense of the data as opposed to just numbers in a spreadsheet
```

    - For thinking post-custodial archiving, SSB has that. To push that labor down into protocol by automating disseminating data. By virtue of viewing, you are seeding. Lovely mechanism
    - Comes with complications. Direct follow-on conversation is scale. Lot of these patterns work if we're not taking up all of users hard drives. Not violating user's expectations. Somebody's participation, becoming seeder is great but wait this thing I downloaded is putting all this data I don't care about on my computer. Shoot!
    - Think that's part of sociological relationship to data. Hardest aspect to remedy. Requires us to stop everybody, Hey! You were upset by CA (Cambridge Analytica) and somebody aggregating your information in ways you disagree with
    - Many remedies will involve convos we didn't want to have before. How do we negotiate that?
    - Shifting labor is real, moving work onto people who weren't doing work before. When thinking about stewardship of information. That's really what we're talking about, when decentralizing - pushing the burden of keeping thing available and online, turning thin clients into stewards.

>     - Paul Frazee's pick think or thin client. New responsibility, hard to change rules of game now. When internet still works this way, everyone's freeloading. Treating data people are creating as labor that can be monetized

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Paul Frazee's piece re thick or thin client. New responsibility, hard to change rules of game now. When internet still works this way, everyone's freeloading. Treating data people are creating as labor that can be monetized
```

    - Feels like central pain of decentralization and feels like one of stewardship.
    - Became a steward overnight and they didn't realize it. How do we have that convo in meaningful way, seeing value in taking SSB road
- RB: Couple thoughts in line and counter
    - First immediate reaction, pushing concept of stewardship into protocol. Good from perspective of: it makes it easy to do. Worry about ways it could hide it from conscious consideration
    - Counterpoint in here is part of what's important, in equitable society, something we should be thinking about. A new point of consideration in these new technologies. Big part of what's different in distributed web stuff. Where things live is something you should be thinking about now, it only exists if it's well stewarded by multiple people. Bears real thinking about
    - To some degree, think it's critical in systems we want to work well that gets surfaced somehow
    - Can't criticize SSB, keep meaning to read up on protocol. To degree of declaring peer/friend, you're stewarding their data. Good thing, makes it a conscious decision. But if you're doing it also for the people you're around maybe it's less good

>     - Counterpoint - I think concerning issue isn't so much scale, as it is scope. Part about scale is more about measurate(?) scale. Mauve's point - can't expect people to also be stewards of LHC, but institutions have same sort of needs of co-work and co-stewardship. The instituions that support that also have to support scale

Reviewer 3: “measurate” → “commensurate”

```suggestion
    - Counterpoint - I think concerning issue isn't so much scale, as it is scope. Part about scale is more about commensurate scale. Mauve's point - can't expect people to also be stewards of LHC, but institutions have same sort of needs of co-work and co-stewardship. The instituions that support that also have to support scale
```

    - The concerning part to pay attention to is  scope. Intentional communities where we can consciously think about what we're stewarding and who we're communicating with. 

>     - The problem is Google storing 5 billion users data instead of community of 1000 or 10, but maybe it's lots of data. It's fine because it's a scope we can make meaningful

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - The problem is Google storing 5 billion users' data instead of community of 1000 or 10, which could still be lots of data. It's fine because it's a scope we can make meaningful
```

>     - The problem is Google storing 5 billion users data instead of community of 1000 or 10, but maybe it's lots of data. It's fine because it's a scope we can make meaningful

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The problem is Google storing 5 billion users' data instead of community of 1000 or 10, but maybe it's lots of data. It's fine because it's a scope we can make meaningful
```

- KN: Looking at this quote right on the screen
> Pushing forward with automated approaches presents a potential danger of marginalizing other approaches - LTER

> - The idea of making it invisible... I just joined SSB and the first question I asked is, "How much data is this taking up on my hard drive?"" Asked an SSB developer, how much do I add on average when I follow someone? He couldn't answer that. That's a good question

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The idea of making it invisible... I just joined SSB and the first question I asked is, "How much data is this taking up on my hard drive?" Asked an SSB developer, how much do I add on average when I follow someone? He couldn't answer that. That's a good question
```

    - What I've seen is that I started at 200MB, now follow about 30 people and it's up to 1.5GB. How did I get here???
    - He showed me other clients like Patchfoo, a light-weight client. Also Manyverse, a mobile app, and I'm unsure how much it downloads. I've had to struggle with wrangling gigs on my phone, so the invisibleness scares me

> - RB: Reminds me of torrenting. Tracking seeding vs downloading. Tracking ratio

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- RB: Reminds me of torrenting. Tracking seeding vs downloading. It was always important to keep your ratio in check
```

    - Maybe a lot of data we can tie those things. Or some data, those two things are separate.
    - What we're wrestling around. Incentives. How do we get people invested in decentralized stewardship? Back around to quote, "tying one's well-being to resource your stewarding". Really resonated. Incentives aren't necessarily monetary. **How to incentivize to particpate in stewardship? How their well-being is involved with care of data**
    - Another point from Tending the Wild, though there are problems of transferring land stewardship to data, but in Coda author says there's the technical rules "how do you manage resource, when do you start a fire", but affecting values, beliefs, behaviors. So much comes back to cultural rules
    - In this case, different kinds of events illustrated importance of stewardship and resource in question, social structures
    - So much more to say around incentives and role of values, developing value and belief-system around data stewardship. Framing themselves as stewards

- KB: Lots of thoughts, writing them down. Want to address incentivation

>     - [Inkandswitch - You own your data](https://www.inkandswitch.com/local-first.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [Inkandswitch - You own your data, in spite of the cloud](https://www.inkandswitch.com/local-first.html)
```

    - Value of offline-first apps to the user. Hint to how we make this transistion to something people feel like doing

>     - For example, programmers have been resistant of IDEs in cloud app environment. Prefer offile. 

Reviewer 4: `Prefer offile` --> `Prefer offline'

>     - For example, programmers have been resistant of IDEs in cloud app environment. Prefer offile. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - For example, programmers have been resistant of IDEs in cloud app environment. Prefer offline. 
```

    - With wealth disparity, people on the bottom will have most use for local-first. They have least say. In the same vicinity you can still communicate with friends. There is no cloud service to pay. Not useful to those who have everything
    - We have 2 class system: producers of tech and consumers of tech. Producers are most informed. Rich tech people working on social media don't give their children phones. They know the peril because they're building it
    - Educating people why they should care or even empowering them is very hard
    - Big point of decentralization is getting rid of servers, lowering barriers to entry. Because now having to pay $5/month for tiny VM already too much because assumes: credit card, monthly income, and tech skills to muck around in server
    - Higher level building blocks that are just your device and sharing to people reduces places where need of tech expertise. Tech expertise becomes more working with your data and sharing it

> - B5: Reading group that has resonated is Civics. Civic republicanism was challenging and earns a place in this convo. Rewind to Eric's comment about incentives

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- B5: Reading group that has resonated is [Civics](https://datatogether.org/posts/02_civics/). Civic republicanism was challenging and earns a place in this convo. Rewind to Eric's comment about incentives
```

    - Mind goes to block chain, economics, one interpretation of incentives
    - But other side is let's do stewardship through dependency. I rely on data therefore will store
    - Third space that has emerged - civic angle. Articulating a moral duty to participate in preservation of information. Something we should call out and talk about, 3 buckets:
        - Economic
        - Interdependence - open source
        - Classic steward - church figure taking care of text, archivist maintaining a collection. They don't depend on it, but carry a lot of weight. 
    - That's harder to talk about. In efforts for post-archival universe, we're wholly in blockchain, everything on chain and life is more boring. Or completely open-source, zealously trading - straw hats for source code. Still have middle space - agree to preserve purely because it's my job, a duty to participate somehow. We need to talk about more

>     - I think about IA, when Trump's tweets get pulled out. No one thought to archive until it was deleted. All these things that aren't valued today but are much valuable for somebody later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - I think about the Internet Archive (IA), when Trump's tweets get pulled out. No one thought to archive until it was deleted. All these things that aren't valued today but are much valuable for somebody later.
```

    - Local-first is just for yourself, then go to concept in what way can that support a community?
    - Torrent trackers, shooting for 1:1 ratio. Seeding and downloading. **Thinking about the numbers, in a community context your responsibility to store others stuff is a lot more than your own.** Which is kind of a thing, right?
    - **How to provide structures to make that easy? Cultural signifiers to make that desirable? Where do local institutions fit in in offloading burden?** It's probably not feasible for everybody. Some sort of community institution that could do that
    - Like IPFS pinning service, not paid for but agreed on, pinning data so not everything is on my machine, so I can still use my computer. So light clients can exist. Supporting a community service that does do that
    - If this is important, have to support idea the more capable or affluent you are the more you have to store of others. What kind of community things can or should exist to offload burden?

> - KB: Rob's articulating what I've been calling "weight of heritage"? Also need to disambiguate 2 types of stewardship

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- KB: Rob's articulating what I've been calling "the weight of heritage"– obligation to steward an ever-growing inheritance of data/knowledge/information/wisdom. Also need to disambiguate 2 types of stewardship
```

    - Embedded in this convo, is we should have a delete button, a way to transmit desire to delete. Right now, it's not in the protocol. Not a slight, it's hard to make and there's lots of other things to make and prioritize
    - As we're trying to get around how stewardship funcitons and how we move across these categories, it comes with new problems and challenges that may not come until the future and Kelsey's aspect of temporal
    - You don't want a delete button, until the minute you really need one. And you don't want a bi-directional, encrypted protocol until you do
    - Don't ask things that aren't possible. It's not possible for protocol designers to think of all edge cases. There's the whole history of law and governments, tyring to plan for stuff you can't plan for
    - Humbling and pressing need for us to break down barriers between producers and consumers, rely on accurate effort to translate into useful metaphors. That effor belongs on people who author protocols

- Mauve: Tech in distributed space don't talk about law. People ask - What if I publish copyrighted stuff on Dat? You get sued! If you're doing something illegal, you should be sued

>     - Some tech people think exclusively about what's cryptographically possible or not possible, but miss the social aspect. The tech should have good defaults that reduce onboarding(?), but societal pressures should push forward

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Some tech people think exclusively about what's cryptographically possible or not possible, but miss the social aspect. The tech should have good defaults that reduce onboarding(?) pain, but societal pressures should push forward
```

    - How do we as a society decide what's good and bad? What to do about it? How can tech not get in the way and provide good guarantees
    - Focusing on just the tech is not enough. It's the least interesting part. Though most to me because it's my speciality
    - On a bigger scale - cultural values, morals, stewardship we focus on. Filecoin - stewardship is in the protocol. Just publish and free market provides, no human involvement. It's one approach, but alternative is people agree on what to do and that's important
    - A partner has data that's confidential, there should be social repurcussions, but tech should try to protect. But then, ditch math and go for the club!

- KB: Loved where we started with personal artifacts moving forward. Loved moved through also: what we're keeping, why we're keeping, who we're keeping it for

>     - Close with quote from short story, talks about disappearance of data over time - The Witness

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Close with quote from short story, talks about disappearance of data over time - [The Witness](https://thefloatinglibrary.com/2008/09/14/the-witness/) by Jorge Luis Borges
```

> > But something or an infinite number of things dies in every death unless the universe is possessed of a memory as the Theosophists(?) have supposed. In the course of time, there was a day that closed the last eyes to see Christ, the bottle of jounin(?), and the love of Helen each died with the death of some one man. What will die with me when I die? What pitiful or perishable form will the world lose? The voice of Macedonia Fernandez? The image of a roan horse upon the vacant lot of Cerrano and sharkas(?)? A bar of sulfur in the drawer of a mahogany desk

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> But something, or an infinite number of things, dies in every death, unless the universe is possessed of a memory, as the theosophists have supposed.
> In the course of time, there was a day that closed the last eyes to see Christ. The bottle of Junin, and the love of Helen each died with the death of some one man. What will die with me when I die, what pitiful or perishable form will the world lose? The voice of Macedonio Fernandez? The image of a roan horse on the vacant lot at Serrano and Charcas? A bar of sulfur in the drawer of a mahogany desk?
```
```suggestion
> But something or an infinite number of things dies in every death unless the universe is possessed of a memory as the Theosophists(?) have supposed. In the course of time, there was a day that closed the last eyes to see Christ, the bottle of jounin(?), and the love of Helen each died with the death of some one man. What will die with me when I die? What pitiful or perishable form will the world lose? The voice of Macedonia Fernandez? The image of a roan horse upon the vacant lot of Cerrano and sharkas(?)? A bar of sulfur in the drawer of a mahogany desk
```
